json/README.md, before:

# GeoJSON files

These files are GIS data meant for mapping the BART system.

## The files themselves

### `bart.kml`

This file was obtained from [the BART website](https://www.bart.gov/schedules/developers/geo) on 2019-03-10.
You can obtain the latest version of this file on their website.

### `stations.geojson`

The station data was exported to GeoJSON from KML via ArcGIS.
I removed some extraneous data, but otherwise the data is straight from the KML.

### `tracks.geojson`

The problem with the KML data above is that the tracks are listed via route, so there's one polyline for an entire route.
In order to work with a mapping software such as `mapview` in R, we need separate pieces of track between stations.
This GeoJSON file has one polyline from station to station.
I was unable to find this data anywhere else, so I made it myself.

To create this file, I imported the track data from the KML file above into ArcGIS.
I then split the polylines for the routes by the stations into separate segments.
Due to the way it was split, I had to merge some pieces back together, and remove some duplicates.
I also removed some extraneous data that wasn't needed, and renamed track segments to be more descriptive.
Finally, I exported the data to GeoJSON via ArcGIS.

## Using the files

My intended use case for this was to map the hourly data as a heat map.
I'm currently working on this, and will post the results to GitHub when I am finished.

Commit message:

Update GeoJSON files to remove cruft, fix names
Update the README and the Python script to match the changes made to
those files. No changes to the actual location data should have occured.

json/README.md, after:

# GeoJSON files

These files are GIS data meant for mapping the BART system.

## The files themselves

### `bart.kml`

This file was obtained from [the BART website](https://www.bart.gov/schedules/developers/geo) on 2019-03-10.
You can obtain the latest version of this file on their website.

### `stations.geojson`

The station data was originally exported to GeoJSON from KML via ArcGIS.
However, I've made significant edits to remove extraneous data provided by ArcGIS.
I also corrected the station names to match the [system map](https://www.bart.gov/system-map), and provided the abbreviations separately.

Normally, I'm a fan of reproducible analysis, and being able to reproduce this file from the original KML via a script would be nice.
However, I made significant changes to what was provided in the original KML, so I don't see a way to make a script to reproduce this.
Thankfully, adding future stations will be fairly easy.

### `tracks.geojson`

The problem with the KML data above is that the tracks are listed via route, so there's one polyline for an entire route.
In order to work with a mapping software such as `mapview` in R, we need separate pieces of track between stations.
This GeoJSON file has one polyline from station to station.
I was unable to find this data anywhere else, so I made it myself.

To create this file, I imported the track data from the KML file above into ArcGIS.
I then split the polylines for the routes by the stations into separate segments.
Due to the way it was split, I had to merge some pieces back together, and remove some duplicates.
Finally, I exported the data to GeoJSON via ArcGIS.
I also removed some extraneous data provided by ArcGIS, and renamed track segments to be more descriptive.

Again, while I'm a fan of reproducible analysis, I don't see a way to reproduce what I did in ArcGIS via a script.

## Using the files

My intended use case for this was to map the hourly data as a heat map.
I'm currently working on this, and will post the results to GitHub when I am finished.
